Image display episode (#27)
HealthBioscienceIDEAS/microscopy-novice: episodes/image-display.md

){alt="Diagram showing two image arrays - 8-bit vs 16-bit (top) with the same 
display (bottom)" width='50%'}

In summary, we can't rely on appearance alone to understand the underlying pixel 
values. Display settings (like the colormap, brightness and contrast - as we 
will see below) have a big impact on how the final image looks.

## Napari plugins

How can we quickly assess the pixel values in an image? We could hover over 
pixels in Napari, or print the array into Napari's console (as we saw last 
episode), but these are hard to interpret at a glance. A much better option is 
to use an image histogram.

To do this, we will have to install a new plugin for Napari. Remember from 
episode 1 that plugins add new features to a piece of software. Napari has 
hundreds of plugins available on the [napari hub](https://www.napari-hub.org/) 
website.

Let's start by going to the napari hub and searching for 'matplotlib':

![](fig/napari-hub.png
){alt="Screenshot of searching 'matplotlib' on napari hub"}

You should see 'napari Matplotlib' appear in the list (if not, try scrolling 
further down the page). If we click on `napari matplotlib` this opens a summary 

> of the plugin with links to the documentation. There's also a useful 'Activity' 

Reviewer: Useful to do a screenshot of this? 
![Uploading Screenshot 2023-12-09 at 17.05.28.png…]()

Reviewer: I tried adding thee screenshot, I'm not quite sure why it didn't attach

tab that summarises the number of installs and maintenance history of the plugin.

Now that we've found the plugin we want to use, let's go ahead and install it 
in Napari. Note that some plugins have special requirements for installation, 
so it's always worth checking their napari hub page for any extra instructions. 
In the top menu bar of Napari select:  
`Plugins > Install/Uninstall Plugins...`

![](fig/plugin-installation.png
){alt="Screenshot of plugin installation window in Napari"}

This should open a window summarising all installed plugins (at the top) and all 
available plugins to install (at the bottom). If we search for 'matplotlib' in 
the top searchbar, then 'napari-matplotlib' will appear under 'Available 

> Plugins'. Press the blue install button and wait for it to finish. You'll then 
> need to close and re-open Napari.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Plugins'. Press the blue install button and wait for it to finish. **You'll then 
need to close and re-open Napari.**
```
Need to make this really clear to the user...bold, separate line of text something.

- What factors could help you decide if the plugin is popular with Napari users?

:::::::::::::::::::::::: solution 

## Solution

### Is a plugin well maintained?

Some factors to look for:

**Last updated**  
Check when the plugin was last updated - was it recently? This is shown in the 
search list summary and under 'Maintenance' in the activity tab. In the activity 
tab, you can also look at a graph summarising the 'commits' over the past year - 
'commits' are made when someone updates their plugin with new changes.

**Documentation**  
Is the plugin summary (+ any linked documentation) detailed enough to explain 
how to use the plugin?

### Is a plugin popular?

Some factors to look for:

**Installs**  
Check how many times a plugin has been installed - a higher number of installs 
usually means it's more popular in the Napari community. The installs are shown 
in the search list summary and under 'Usage' in the activity tab. In the 
activity tab, you can also look at a graph summarising the installs over the 
past year.

**Image.sc**  
It can also be useful to search the plugin's name on the 
[image.sc](https://forum.image.sc/) forum to see if other people had good 

> experiences with it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
experiences with it and/or the support provided by the community.
```

Reviewer: By the community, do you mean the image.sc users or do you mean the developers who made it? Because if the former, then I think we should also mention the developers as well, as you could get support either from them or the image.sc users who have used it before.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Image histograms

Let's use our newly installed plugin to look at the human mitosis image. If you 
don't have it open, go the top menubar and select:
`File > Open Sample > napari builtins > Human Mitosis`

Then open the image histogram with:  
`Plugins > napari Matplotlib > Histogram`

You should see a histogram open on the right side of the image:

![](fig/mitosis-histogram.png
){alt="Screenshot of image histogram for mitosis image" width='70%'}

Here, I've changed Napari to light mode to make the histogram easier to see 
(`File > Preferences > Appearance > Theme > light`), but you're welcome to 
continue using dark mode if you prefer.

This histogram summarises the pixel values of the entire image. On the x axis 
is the pixel value which run from 0-255 for this 8-bit image. This is split 
into a number of 'bins' of a certain width (for example, it could be 0-10, 11-20 

> and so on...). Each bin has a blue bar whose height is proprotional to the 
> number of pixels with values in that bin. So, for example, for our mitosis image 

Reviewer 2: I feel that saying "proportional" may make it more complicated.
```suggestion
and so on...). Each bin has a blue bar whose height represents the 
number of pixels with values in that bin. So, for example, for our mitosis image 
```

Reviewer: Also proportional is misspelled

we see the highest bars to the left, with shorter bars to the right. This means 
this image has a lot of very dark (low intensity) pixels and fewer bright 
(high intensity) pixels.

Let's quickly compare to another image. Open the 'coins' image with:  
`File > Open Sample > napari builtins > Coins`

![](fig/coins-histogram.png
){alt="Screenshot of image histogram for coins image" width='68%'}

> From the histogram, we can see that this image has a wider spread of pixel 

Reviewer: As mentioned with the picture, the histogram here looks odd and it might be worth explaining those funny spikes.

values. There are bars of similar height across many different values (rather 
than just one big peak at the left hand side).

Image histograms are a great way to quickly summarise and compare pixel values 
of different images.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge

## Histograms

> Match each of these small test images to their corresponding histogram. You can 

Reviewer: Really like this exercise!

assume that all images are displayed with a standard gray colormap and default 
contrast limits of the min/max possible pixel values:

![](fig/exercise-hist-images.png
){alt="Screenshot of 4 small grayscale test images" width='68%'}

![](fig/exercise-histograms.png
){alt="Screenshot of 4 histograms, corresponding to the test images"}

:::::::::::::::::::::::: solution 

## Solution

- a - 3
- b - 4
- c - 2
- d - 1

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Changing display settings

What happens to pixel values when we change the display settings? Try changing 
the contrast limits or colormap in the layer controls. You should see that the 
histogram stays the same, no matter what settings you change i.e. the display 
settings don't affect the underlying pixel values.

> This is one of the reasons it's important to use software designed for 

Reviewer: Think it's worth adding emphasis on this setence, bold or italics.

scientific analysis to work with your light microscopy images. Software like 
Napari and ImageJ will try to ensure that your pixel values remain unchanged, 
while other image editing software (designed for working with photographs) may 
change the pixel values in unexpected ways. Also, even with scientific software, 
some image processing steps (that we'll see in later episodes) will change the 
pixel values. 

Keep this in mind and make sure you always retain a copy of your original data, 
in its original file format! We'll see in episode X that original image files 
contain important metadata that should be kept for future reference.

## Colormaps / LUTs

> Let's dig deeper into Napari's colormaps. We've already seen in episode X that 

Reviewer: I don't think we have really explained what a colormap is yet, so I think it might be worth looping back to the start of the image, where the same voxels are displayed with different colors. I think it might be worth a reminder here to start here that pixels just hold numbers and we have to find a way that best displays these numbers as pixel intensities and colours. Enter the colormap. And then use some of the text below.

the colormap can be changed by choosing different options from the 'colormap' 
menu in the layer controls. But how do these colormaps actually work?

Colormaps (also known as lookup tables or LUTs) match each pixel value to a 
colour to use for display. For example, see the diagram below showing the 
'gray' colormap:

![](fig/gray-colorbar.png
){alt="Grey colormap shown as a colorbar with corresponding pixel values" 
width='50%'}

Each pixel value from 0-255 maps to a corresponding colour. See the diagram 
below for examples of 4 different colormaps with an example image histogram:

![](fig/colorbar-comparison.png
){alt="Four histograms showing the gray, green, viridis and inferno colormap 
and correspoinding colorbar"}

Why would we want to use different colormaps?

- to highlight specific features in an image

> - to help with overlaying multiple images, as we saw in episode X when we 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- to help with overlaying multiple images, as we saw in episode FIXME X when we 
```

Adding a `FIXME` may be easier for later to find out about it. (VS Code - through [todo-tree](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Gruntfuggly.todo-tree) and other editor have plug-ins that help to list these)
In any case, @milanmlft is there something in sandpaper that can refer to different episodes and link them so that it numbers it when compiled?

Reviewer 3: Hmm, don't think so, but you can use [markdown internal links](https://carpentries.github.io/sandpaper-docs/episodes.html#internal-links), so instead maybe you could do

```suggestion
- to help with overlaying multiple images, as we saw in the [FIXME X episode](./FIXME-X.md) when we 
```

Personally I prefer the episode title being written out anyway, instead of having to remember what episode `<arbitrary-number>` refers to 😅

displayed green nuclei and magenta membranes together.
- to help interpretation of an image. For example, if we used a red fluorescent 
label in an experiment, then using a red colormap might help people understand 
the image quickly.

## Brightness and contrast

As the final section of this episode, let's learn more about the 
'contrast limits' in Napari. As we saw in episode X, adjusting the contrast 
limits in the layer controls changes how bright different parts of the image are 
displayed. What is really going on here though?

In fact, the 'contrast limits' are adjusting how our colormap gets applied to 
the image. For example, consider the standard gray colormap:

![](fig/contrast-comparison-0-255.png
){alt="Histogram coloured by gray colormap with corresponding colorbar. Contrast 

> limits 0 and 255." width='70%'}

Reviewer: Which image do these histograms correspond to? Can we put up the associated image so that they can see the changes?

Author: These histograms correspond to the coins image - I'll add this into the plots
